sketch design idea for richer ETL patterns (#27)
brimdata/zinger: design.md

this record's transaction ID is no longer needed to be excluded as
a candidate for processing.

The "staging" pool's pool key is `seqno` and is sorted in descending order.

Each commit to the staging pool also records the cursor from the "raw" pool
at the time of the "staging" commit, where the cursor is defined as the
largest "raw" sequence number that contains only processed and expired records.
It is stored with the following type signature:
```
{
  seqno: int64,
} (=cursor)
```
Given this data model, we can efficiently find the largest committed cursor with:
```
is(type(cursor)) | head 1 | cut cursor:=seqno
```
And we can find all of the transaction IDs past the cursor that are already
committed with:
```
seqno > $cursor | cut txn
```
Note that it is an invariant that the committed cursor is always less than or equal
to all of the `seqno` fields in a given commit.

Finally, we can find the max offset for each topic using
```
max(kafka.offset) by kafka.topic
```
Since this query is unbounded, it would be more efficient to find the
first offset in descending order then stop when they are all found.

This can be easily accomplished by running
```
kafka.topic==$topic | head 1
```

> for each literal valued `$topic`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for each literal-valued `$topic`.
```

Or maybe just "for each topic"?

> Note, it could be better to run this in parallel where we can scan for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that it could be better to run this in parallel with a single scan for
```

the max offset of each predetermined topic name, which might look something
like this:
```
switch kafka.topic (
  "table1" => head 1 | cut kafka;
  "table2" => head 1 | cut kafka;
  ...
  "tableN" => head 1 | cut kafka;
) | offsets:=collect(kafka) by typeof(this)
```

## Example

> We will illustrate this design with a simple example comprised of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will illustrate this design with a simple example comprising
```

> two input tables received on two Kafka topics being transformed to
> two output tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two input tables received on two Kafka topics being transformed to
one output table.
```

The input tables are:
* the "order" table with signature `{customer:string,item:string,qty:int64}`
* the "menu" table with signature `{item:string,price:float64}`

> The output tables are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output tables is:
```

* the "order" table with signature `{customerID:int64,,menuID:int64,qty:int64,total:float64}`

> For multiple output tables, we need to work out a multi-record output using "explode"
> for each transactiom budle.

### Setup

> To try out an example, run a zed lake service in one shell:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To try out this example, run a Zed lake service in one shell:
```

```
mkdir scratch
zed lake serve -R scratch
```
and in another create the ETL pools:
```
zapi create -orderby seqno:asc raw
zapi create -orderby seqno:desc staging
```

### Example Inputs

Given the above assumptions, suppose the following records are received from
Kafka as each indicated batch (a batch may be terminated by a timeout,

> a max number of records, etc but here we just impose batch boundaries to support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a max number of records, etc. but here we just impose batch boundaries to support
```

the example) and the ZSON batches here depict the data that `zinger` would
create by reading and converting Avro records off the two Kafka topics
"order" and "inventory".

> This files are stored in the `./demo` directory of this repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This files are stored in the [`demo`](demo) directory of this repo.
```

Here is `demo/consumer-1.zson`:
```
{
  seqno: 1,
  kafka: {
    topic: "order",
    offset: 1,
  },
  value: {
    txn: 10000,
    done: false,
    row: {
      customer: "jane",
      product: "taco",
      qty: 2,
    }
  }
}
{
  seqno: 2,
  kafka: {
    topic: "order",
    offset: 2,
  },
  value: {
    txn: 10001,
    done: false,
    row: {
      customer: "bob",
      product: "burrito",
      qty: 1,
    }
  }
}
{
  seqno: 3,
  kafka: {
    topic: "menu",
    offset: 1,
  },
  value: {
    txn: 10000,
    done: true,
    row: {
      product: "taco",
      price: 1.99,
    }
  }
}
```

Load this data into the "raw" pool:
```
zapi load -use raw@main demo/consume-1.zson
```

> Now we can this aggregations to get the all of the disaggregated transactions
> re-aggregated by `txn` ID and compute that maximum `seqno` across the bundle:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can run this to find all of the disaggregated transactions,
re-aggregate them by `txn` ID, and compute the maximum `seqno` across the bundle:
```

```
zapi query "from raw | records:=collect(this),seqno:=max(seqno),done:=or(value.done) by txn:=value.txn"
```
We want to apply ETL logic to the records that are ready to be processed

> (e.g., have `done` true) and we simply reach into the records array to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(e.g., have `done` true) so we simply reach into the records array to
```

create our new ETL'd record.  We will put this in a file called `demo/etl.zed`:
```
const customerIDs = |{
        "jane": 1,
        "bob": 2,
        "sarah": 3
}|;
const menuIDs = |{
        "burrito": 100,
        "taco": 200,
        "chips": 300
}|;
from raw | records:=collect(this),seqno:=max(seqno),done:=or(value.done) by txn:=value.txn
| done==true
| cut this:={
    customerID:customerIDs[records[0].value.row.customer],
    menuID:menuIDs[records[0].value.row.product],
    qty: records[0].value.row.qty,
    total: records[0].value.row.qty * records[1].value.row.price
  }
```
You can see the processed record by running this:
```
zapi query -I demo/etl.zed
```

> and we get...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And we get this:
```

```
{customerID:1,menuID:200,qty:2,total:3.98}
```

> Zinger sync would then sync this results --- which here is a single record

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`zinger sync` would then sync this result --- which here is a single record
```

but would more generally be multiple records --- by wrapping it in Kafka meta
info and updating the cursor, e.g., as follows:
```
{
  seqno:3,
  kafka:{topic:"order",offset:1},
  row:{customerID:1,menuID:200,qty:2,total:3.98}
}
{seqno:2}(=cursor)
```
The cursor is now at 2 since there still is pending data with
a `seqno` of 2.

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> we add this capability.

To illustrate the steps here, you can manually load this data into
"staging" using:
```
zapi load -use staging@main demo/staging-1.zson
```

Next suppose new data arrives that complete the pending one.  Load it with:
```
zapi load -use raw@main demo/consume-2.zson
```

Now, suppose zinger restarts in this sitaution.  Here are the steps needed to
merge the new transaction into "staging".

First, we need to find the current cursor stored in "staging":
```
zapi query "from staging | is(type(cursor)) | max(seqno)"
{max:2}
```
Ok, it's '2'.  Now we get all the transaction data from "raw" greater than 2
and we get:
```
{seqno:2,kafka:{topic:"order",offset:2},value:{txn:10001,done:false,row:{customer:"bob",product:"burrito",qty:1}}}
{seqno:3,kafka:{topic:"menu",offset:1},value:{txn:10000,done:true,row:{product:"taco",price:1.99}}}
{seqno:4,kafka:{topic:"menu",offset:2},value:{txn:10001,done:true,row:{product:"burrito",price:5.99}}}
```
Note that seqno 3 has already been processed.  We can get a list of sequence numbers
already processed from "staging", e.g.,
```
zapi query "from staging | not is(type(cursor)) | seqno >= 2 | cut seqno"
```

> and we can do an anti-join with the "raw" transactions to get just the records

Reviewer: I think we should go with "anti join". It seems to be the most common styling and it also matches the Zed syntax.

```suggestion
and we can do an anti join with the "raw" transactions to get just the records
```

that we want to process.  We'll put this in `demo/update.zed`:
```
from (
  raw => seqno >= 2 | sort seqno;
  staging => not is(type(cursor)) | seqno >= 2 | cut seqno | sort seqno;
)
| anti join on seqno=seqno
```
Run this with
```
zapi query -I demo/update.zed
```
And we get exactly the records for the pending transaction:
```
{seqno:2,kafka:{topic:"order",offset:2},value:{txn:10001,done:false,row:{customer:"bob",product:"burrito",qty:1}}}
{seqno:4,kafka:{topic:"menu",offset:2},value:{txn:10001,done:true,row:{product:"burrito",price:5.99}}}
```

> Now we can put together the anti-join step with the ETL step in `demo/update-etl.zed`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can put together the anti join step with the ETL step in `demo/update-etl.zed`:
```

Author: But that's a noun modifier and should have a dash!
